And, yes, the patterns we get are now ones that achieve larger “bounding box width”. But somehow there’s still a remarkable similarity to what we saw with a rather different fitness function above. And, for example, in both cases, high fitness, it seems, is normally achieved in a complicated and hard-to-understand way. (The last pattern is a bit of an exception; as can also happen in biology, this is a case where for once there’s a “mechanism” in evidence that we can understand.)

So what in the end is going on? As I discussed when I introduced the model a few months ago, it seems that the “dominant force” is not selection according to fitness functions, but instead the fundamental computational phenomenon of computational irreducibility. And what we’ll find here is that in fact what we see is, more than anything, the result of an interplay between the computational irreducibility of the process by which our phenotypes develop, and the computational boundedness of typical forms of fitness functions.

The importance of such an interplay is something that’s very much come into focus as a result of our Physics Project. And indeed it now seems that the foundations of both physics and mathematics are—more than anything—reflections of this interplay. And now it seems that’s true of biological evolution as well.

In studying our model, there are many detailed phenomena we’ll encounter—most of which seem to have surprisingly direct analogs in actual biological evolution. For example, here’s what happens if we plot the behavior of the fitness function for our first example above over the course of the adaptive evolution process:
